# Backend DevelopmentAn application’s backend is the unsung hero who’s often doing much of the heavy lifting behind the scenes. It controls how an application works, handling storing and retrieving data, performing complex operations, and more. It does not control what an application actually looks like—that is up to the frontend, which can send data to the backend and in turn display data or even entire pages returned by it.## Popular Backend Frameworks 2020The following frameworks allow you to build powerful, extendable backends for your application. While there are many more beyond those mentioned, these are some of the most popular and easy-to-use; all are free, open source, and actively maintained, with a plethora of resources available online for learning. When choosing a framework to use, it often makes sense to pick one that uses a language you are most familiar with### NodeJS + Express*   **Initial release**: November 2010*   **Maintained by:** Open source community*   **Language:** JavaScript*   **Companies/apps using:** Paypal, Netflow, Uber, NASAExpress, a web application framework that runs upon Node.js (Node.js is a JavaScript runtime, which means it can execute JavaScript code, which Express is, outside of a web browser).  Express provides customizable middleware layer for an app that allows developers to easily create full applications or REST API’s. Basically, this means it is easy for your backend to listen to incoming requests and handle them. This framework is extremely popular, well-maintained, and documented.### Spring*   **Initial release**: October 2002*   **Maintained by:** Pivotal Software (open source)*   **Language:** Java*   **Companies/apps using:** Accenture, Zillow, IntuitSpring is a framework that uses Java and the Model-View-Controller (MVC) structure to create powerful backends for web applications. It has been in development a long time, and has many optional packages to add new features to it. Being that it uses Java, all code in a Spring application has strong typing, so bugs may be easier to evade compared to frameworks using weakly-typed languages like JavaScript.### Django*   **Initial release:** July 2005*   **Maintained by:** Django Software Foundation (open source)*   **Language:** Python*   **Companies/apps using:** Instagram, Google, Udemy, RobinhoodDjango is a popular Python framework that comes with many features built-in, including capabilities for authentication and messaging that may require a third-party package in other frameworks. It uses a Model-View-Template (MVT) architecture, which is similar to a Model-View-Controller structure. A Django process flow involves receiving a server request, finding the appropriate template view for that request (which may be an HTML page), filling the template in with data from the model, and then sending it back to the requester. Django also includes a useful Object Relational Mapper (ORM) layer which makes it easy to interact with a database using simple Python commands. Overall, this framework may be a good choice for those already familiar with Python and/or MVC architecture or are interested in learning about it.